---
title: What is the economic cost of soil compaction? Initial estimation via geophysical mapping and continental agroecosystem modelling
description: Soil compaction is a threat with negative impacts on soil ecosystem services, such as food production, groundwater recharge and climate regulation. This study discusses an approach to estimate them by combining (1) continental-based agroecosystem simulations of compaction induced economic losses and (2) case study-based quantification of soil compaction spatial extent with geophysical methods.
---

# Abstract
Soil compaction is a threat with negative impacts on soil ecosystem services, such as food production, groundwater recharge and climate regulation. The extent and severity of the environmental and economic impacts of compaction remain challenging to quantify. This study provides an approach to estimate them by combining (1) case study-based quantification of soil compaction spatial extent with geophysical methods., and (2) continental-based agroecosystem simulations of compaction induced economic losses. 

To illustrate this, we used two case studies of compacted fields mapped with electromagnetic induction methods in Germany (@10.1111/sum.12763; 20% of area compacted) and Belgium (@10.1111/sum.12812; 25% of area compacted), in combination with continental simulations of soil compaction impacts on ecosystem services in cropland using a soil-compaction-agroecosystem model. The simulations predict changes in crop yield, nitrogen losses and soil carbon stocks from compacted arable land across Europe under the high emissions Shared Socioeconomic Pathway (SSP585) scenario considering winter wheat, the most cultivated crop in Europe. These changes are subsequently converted to economic losses based on literature values of their corresponding soil ecosystem services loss. The predicted costs (€ha-1yr-1) result from an ensemble of 300 predictions comprising (i) three compaction levels (representing wheel loads of 4, 6 and 8 Mg) capturing uncertainty of levels of compaction, (ii) five coupled climate models accounting for uncertainty on climate predictions, and (iii) twenty-year-long period (from 2020-2040) to account for local climate variability in the Near Future. 

As shown in {numref}`fig:arrplot`, the predicted compaction extent of soil compaction (% of the total area), can then be matched with their corresponding predictions of compaction induced losses using their geographical location (latitude and longitude). For the case-studies selected here, this pairing leads to estimations of economic losses of 28.2 ±10.6 €ha-1yr-1 for the field-site in Germany and 21.6 ±13 €ha-1yr-1 for the field-site in Belgium. Assuming the percentages of compacted fields hold across these countries, this leads to an estimated annual cost of soil compaction of 454 and 38 M€ for Germany and Belgium, respectively. This framework offers an initial assessment of region/farm specific soil compaction induced economic losses in cropland which can help to further incentivize soil health and ecosystem service protection.


:::{figure} #arrplot
:label: fig:arrplot
:placeholder: arrplot.jpg

Interactive map of soil compaction-induced economic cost and soil services losses in European cropland. The figure allows users to input the percentage of compacted land (in %), the latitude and longitude (degress) of the location of interest, and the limits of the colormap. The panel on the left shows the colormap of soil compaction economic costs with the input settings. The panel on the right outputs the corresponding histograms of compaction induced economic costs, crop yield loss, carbon loss, increase in nitrous oxide emissions and increase in nitrate leaching. The initial settings correspons to the study of @10.1111/sum.12812, located in Germany. The colormap was created with simulations reported in Romero-Ruiz et al., (2026).
:::